Oh " no . I am not gonna take her outside . because anything could happen if I take her outside . I am afraid that something will " se va a caer o ninguna cosa . Lo ponemos ahí <UNK> . No podemos hablar de Ri . Podemos hablar de Rita . Umm . Cuando ya terminen olvídense que está la grabadora nomás ahí que se quede y la recojo yo luego . Y aquí la pongo en tu caja . OK . Do you want some tomato chaff <UNK> ? No " así están bien . Whatever you wanna do . So " she is taking care of baby ? OK . Well " in that case . Le digo " take her outside or play or something . No " dice because I am afraid something is gonna happen . Well if the kid can baby-sit himself by watching TV " then all she has to do is make sure he does not leave the house . It is a little girl . Oh " a little girl . Mmmhmm . I just " it is easy . y dijo que " digo " when she is done " digo " if you wanna watch TV well then just " uh " you know just go there and watch TV " and then she will play with her toys . Well " does she " uh " do " does she leave her food there also ? Mmm-hmmm She left her her food there . And change her diaper though . She is two " I do not think she is . So she kno- <UNK> Mmm-hmm . Sí " pos " es lo que le digo que quiere entrar a las cinco " and I need to go home and and change you know . No " dijo . I will be back by two . Oh " okay . So who is gonna take of her until two o'clock then ? I love the soup noodles . When do you have the raspberry muffins ? Tomatoes " ok ? Hmm . From the refrigerator ? They are right here . What ? Oh " there it is . So " they are gonna bury him today ? Yeah " this morning . At ten o'clock . En dónde ? En Mont Carmel . Oh " I love that cemetery . Pero " que ta muy lejos para ir a misa . You know another hour then another hour at two to the funeral and ? <UNK> tomatoes . Hmm ? So " I did not make it to the ? to the funeral . They were um " they were taking up a collection . For what ? For the family " a mí se me hace que " How sad . A mí se me hace que quedó muy endrogada . Por qué ? Cómo ? Cuánto duró en el hospital ? Casi el mes . En intensive care " eh . Oh . that is gonna be . She is gonna have to <UNK> the house . Yeah . So " um " I do not know " I kind of get the feeling ? Did he have insurance ? I have a feeling that he did not have insurance . Oh man . I do not know " because the police thought you know he was a policeman " and the police officers were there taking up a collection for them . So " I think that they must have been what do you think <UNK> ? He what ? I think they are gonna <UNK> need money for medical expenses . Gracias . <UNK> from the Dean . So see " this is when they were talking about where they should reverse the voices and put somebody else voice on there . Frog <UNK> . This is when they were talking about you . They were planning a lawsuit . Well ? No " es que one of her boyfriends se murió . El sábado " tenía cuarenta y nueve años . Está joven . I know . De complicaciones de una virus . pero no supe de qué ? Pero qué tipo de virus " no te dijeron ? Nn-hmm . Y le pego en el corazon ? No . No " este ? that was another complication . What happened ? He got a virus of some kind . Uh-huh . I do not know it was <UNK> virus or blue or whatever . It was at <UNK> " verdad ? Yeah . I kind of thought it was . I had to ? I had to ? Lemme get the check . I was " I was " I was nervous because . Hmm . Oh " wow . Really they loosed them . Vaya " tienes que pedirlo through para " uh " uh " desde la China o <UNK> ? No " no " no " and ? La China ? <UNK> embajada china . Oh . Dije " ah Chihuahua " pos con razón . No " no . Lo mandé a Houston . Y luego " uh " que documentación te piden ? Para la visa ? Pero no es visa " es más bien pasaporte para entrar al país no ? Eh " o sea el pasaporte es de <UNK> . No ponen tu nombre completo . No ? No ponen tu nombre completo . No ? Nomas le ponen H  Salas Robles . O sea el ? You are going to China ? Yeah . Uh-huh . Wow " on vacation or just ? No " a conference . Wow ? Next week . Y de vacaciones también . Para qué te " para qué te haces ? A little bit of both " al cabo lo estamos grabando " verdad ? Le vamos a decir a a Marisa . Con las chinitas . Cállate . Whoops ! Que no te oiga . Now he is turning red . I am leaving . Ya se va " ya se va . Antes de que vaya <UNK> diga más . Well " see ya " bye . <UNK> van a agarrar puras risadas . That was funny . I thought he was too . Entonces le dio el virus . y no se lo atendió " and the virus spread through his body " and it took over his whole body " digo " it is like that virus is attacking your entire body . And so " no " no . Ya agarré " ya tengo " and " um " luego le están dando antibiotics . Se ve muy caro mal <UNK> . Y ya no le hizo . Le dieron " like megadoses of antibiotics and did not help him " and at the same time they found out that he had a blocked artery . Oof ! Hmm . And they said " but we cannot do anything about the arteries because he is too weak . Uh-huh . Y eh " en un " y de ahí se fue para abajo " no ? Mmm-hmm . Mmm-hmm . Mmm . Y " um ? I do not know al último como estaría . Cuando yo lo vi " he looked pretty bad " but <UNK> . Pero estaba consciente ? I mean . Sí . Was he awake " or what is going on ? Yeah . Yeah . Sí " porque yo me arrimé y luego le dije " Daniel " le dije " it is me " you know ? Y luego le dije " it is Rose Baquera . You know ? And " le agarré la mano y le dije " do you know that I am here " and he opened one eye . Abrió un ojo así " amuy apenitas pero abrió un ojo " you know ? Como letting you know " yeah I know . I know you are here " and uh " y a Aurelio " a Aurelio también le agarró la mano " dijo " pero a él le corrió las lágrimas . Es que con Aurelio they clashed <UNK> . Yeah . Son muy amigos " they have been friends since they were little . I am trying to place his face . Was he at the parade ? A lot of them did not know him because he was in there very often " but " Well ? He was at the first . the first book " the first book . Parade . Mmm-hmm . No " en el que estaba Star Wars . that was the second one . Umm . He was in it though . I do not think so . No ? No . He was there for the first book . and he helped a little bit with the Star Wars . Mm-hmm . But not very often . Ooh " <UNK> . Quedó muy hinchado . Por toda la medicina . Mmm-hmm . And then retention of the fluids . So " de por si " soy chillona y luego que me sentaron ahí en frente . So " digo al principio soy bien chillona y luego me sentaron ahí enfrente . Mmm-hmm . Kids " little kids ? Grandes ? Uno de ellos tenía como unos twelve . Eleven " twelve . Ooh " ya no están . The only girl looked like Alex " maybe seventeen " eighteen . Well " I do not know the old one the other one must have been somewhere between maybe fifteen or sixteen . They were young ! Yeah . Oh " but you look forty-nine . Do I ? Forty-nine ? Mmm-hmm . Still . Mmm-hmm . Think about it . Our kids were already in the late teh " teens early twenty's at at that age . Yeah . What ? Thumbs down for what Leo ? Over the hill . So " So " I was thinking he was young " but I am thinking no " that is over already <UNK> . Mmm-hmm . Well . Pass me the leash <UNK> . Hmm ? Please pass me the leash . I am not sure if he retired from the police force or what the deal was . Oh " he worked with the police force ? Yeah . Was he a cop ? Mmm-hmm . Daniel what ? Huerta . I do not know why " but the name sounds familiar . Michelle knew him . Because he used to spend a lot of time at the " Café Central ? Oh " sí ? Mmm-hmm . So " I am assuming that I am not a cop " ex-cop or cop . Yeah " more do <UNK> . Than a lot of bully <UNK> people . Hmm . Well . Well . Era de muy bonito carácter . Very easygoing . Him ? You never saw him upset or anything . He was always . What year did he graduate ? Seventy-five . Oh " he was young . Yeah . He graduated with Chavita and and um Adrian and " umm ... Do not mention Chavita . And Adrian . I cannot stand that <UNK> " I cannot stand that guy . Eitale . Hey " you um <UNK> there . What is good for <UNK> ? What do you mean ? I do not know what that is . <UNK> Is that corn ? Who ? Es elote ? No " son piñones . No " piñones . Oh . Oh " they look a little strange . Pues es que parecían como semillas de limón al principio dije " pero tanta ? Nhh-hnnn . No . <UNK> muchas ? La hija me recordó un poco a Alex . Por qué ? She was about her age . y dijo " Se paró y luego dijo " I do not know if I can do this " hmm . She sent a little poem . Something about the chain is broken " because it is missing one link . You know " I <UNK> in last week obituary . Of a young girl who had passed away at the same time . And so beautiful " <UNK> . Yeah . He did that " and ? dice I am gonna miss my dad " dijo because every morning " dijo " I was very lazy . I had trouble waking up in the morning . Dijo and every morning my dad would make me a cup of coffee . A la mejor . And he would go " dijo " and wake me up and say " here is your coffee " wake up . Well " I am no longer gonna get that cup of coffee <UNK> . Tantos ? Well . I know " that is sad . Yeah . Trabaja ? I do not think so . I do not think she did . I do not know " maybe she did . I really do not know . Well " she is gonna get Survivor's benefits . Y muy simpática ella . Si ? La esposa . No doubt she will probably end up marrying again . He was tall . Well he was ? está medio guera . He was a <UNK> . Daniel ? I think she was taller than he was . Y un carácter muy bonito también ella . Very easygoing . She was just barely holding on la pobre . Do not you wonder " you know how . People passing away . People you know " people you were acquainted with and people who were right close to you . In life we treated <UNK> when they passed on . You have seen things that you probably never even noted when they were alive . Mmm-hmm . It is sad that we have to wait when a person is gone to ? To notice the quality . I am not paying . Del grupo de nosotros de los Dragon Connections " nomás fui yo y esta Lisa and her husband . Hmm . Martin went " he went very " like in early afternoon y nada más así entrada por salida nada más " which is unusual because he never even goes to funerals . Dice " a mí no me gusta " le dije really ? Yeah " a mí sí me encanta " vieras como me encanta andar en la funeral . Pero a quién le gusta ? Si no vas por gusto " vas por pagar tus últimos respetos Pos " dumb remark " you know ? Really ? A mí me encanta . I had such a good time . Pobre muertito <UNK> quedará <UNK> sordo ! Sí . Pos sí . Digo es que a mí no me gusta ir " really ? Le digo " a mí sí " como me encanta . Le dije " nothing I would rather be doing with my time " <UNK> you know ? Le dije " nobody likes to go to funerals . dije " but " le dije " como dices tú " this is how you know who your friends are . Le dije . You know ? Le dije cuando they show up for something like that . Digo " <UNK> it is TRUE . Porque estaba una vez " we were in the American Legion allá en <UNK> . El commander del American Legion era medio pesado y luego estaba también de peleonero . Se andaba una agarrada una vez que yo pensaba que se iban a dar en la torre " and I had to go interfere " you know ? Le dije " stop it . Le dije " if you do not stop it right now ? This is not . What happened ? I do not even remember what they were arguing about " you know ? Pero " they were just going on and on " le dije " this is ridiculous . Le dije " you know " you are not gonna accompleme " accomplish anything like this " you know " fighting and yelling at each other " like " yeah that is enough . And " uh . Yeah they almost stopped <UNK> " you know ? Digo ya pararon y anyway se pasó " tiempo y luego se murió la mama de Lisa . <UNK> Y " who shows up <UNK> the funeral " but <UNK> Ed . Llego ahí Ed y le dio el pésame a Sarah " dijo " you know at that moment I forgave and forgot everything we " he ever said to me y dijo I do not even remember de que nos enojamos " dijo " but . Y-y-yeah . To this day " dijo " I respect the man . I did not just " <UNK> you know ? Yeah . Because when it mattered <UNK> when <UNK> he was there " you know ? Mmm-hmm . Though he took the time <UNK> to be her husband . Hmm . Verdad ? Le dije pos sí . Y todavia he talks about it " you know ? Yeah . Se agradeció y no que fue . You slurped that thing there . Hijole " <UNK> Do not worry " nobody is gonna steal your food . Twenty minutes . Hijole . <UNK> esta mañana teníamos como unos quince para lunching y le dije a Lisa " I bet you that the faculty forgot . Mmm-hmm . Le dije " I am gonna send the reminder and see what happens . Well the minute I send the reminder " they all came up with the money . Recuérdame ? Because I put down on the email " those of you that plan on showing up at the last minute . Mmm-hmm . Le dije " en consideration of those that prepayed " you will have to wait until all of them have eaten " have been served . Mmm " pos para saber ? Le dije " and if there is any food left over ? Mmm-hmm . Then you can pay and eat " because you know " I mean " people that prepayed have to eat first . <UNK> así ni nada . Mmm-hmm . If they say they did not know " pos ? Así lo dejamos . <UNK> y no pagan . Y le digo so " make sure you pay " and if you do not pay " cuando dice Carlos " figure out a diligent way to tell them that " you know " if they did not pay they do not eat . I mean " they can eat " pero tienen que comer primero los que pagaron . Umm . Remind me to give you the money that Tina gave me for ? For her and . And your three tech guys " and then umm " and Steve gave me for him and Deana . OK . Ya se esta preocupando Michael " uh " este Carlos . Por qué ? Whoa . How many do we have ? What are you gonna get ? Steak and chicken . And what sides is he getting ? Nothing ? I mean " if that is how it is " take the chicken and ? No " no " pos la " esta Tere va a traer una salad " and Lisa va a traer beans . And " I am gonna bring some kind of potato . We wanted to do baked potatoes " but with that many people . Nhh-mmm . that is too much . I will have to maybe just to mix some kind of potato casserole . Or maybe just cut up the potatoes with some butter or something . Hmm . Something I can put in the microwave because ? Real quick . It is hard to cook . In the microwave . And then " uh probably order a cake for Lisa " since it is her birthday . So " is Carlos gonna start cooking at eleven-thirty ? Probably at eleven " I think . Mmm . Maybe a little bit " it is to start at what " eleven-thirty ? I do not think he will have everything finished in thirty minutes ? Will he ? I do not know . He is already " he does it all the time so I am sure he already knows . He is already got it down to a sign . He has pract- probably practiced by the way . Well I am sure he does . He what ? He has practiced already . The only thing he is concerned with our chairs . Umm ... he set/said about four tables . Is it gonna be at ten <UNK> with the grassy area ? Will we have the tailgate party ? Uh-uh . Enfrente " con zacate y ? Oh " OK . The lawn . Mmm-hmm . Ahí va ser . So " uh ? we will see about tables and chairs . It will be nice . He said Tere Lucas " no " as uh " what ? Carol " no " dijo esto ya no es piquiniqui " dijo " es pachanga " y le dije y para changos también . Maybe we can have an evaluation done ? that tomorrow . The evaluation done ? What evaluation ? The personal . Oh " is that one you have to " uh " the ? Oh yeah " we can have the tape recording there . Poor Michael " he is upset . I am speechless . Well " I do not blame you . Like he said " it does not make sense . No . They want " the Dean wants us to do another va ? you know the <UNK> what a year ago " two years ago ? Oh yeah " yeah . The one " the <UNK> the personality test . The one that " the one that they ask questions at they are like . Oh gosh . Save the green people and the gold people . Yeah . <UNK> green " I always know I am the <UNK> guy . Yeah " that is . He wants to know exactly what is <UNK> . Two hours . I am gonna be away two hours . Just you ? No " everybody . On the " on our group only . Only the tech groups . Which makes no sense " and like " so that is personality " personality test for the take test <UNK> I wonder what they are gonna be . The text . The text . Yeah " the ques- " if the same " if the questions are gonna be the same . They are not gonna be the same . The results are gonna be the same " I am thinking . Ahem . The only difference is gonna find out who is more technical than the other one <UNK> . Finally got those two students paid . Uh " Byron s students " uh " Parsa and Badal . Finally " they are gonna cut a check either today or tomorrow . Es que they are " they are here from India just for twenty days or twenty-two days . Why ? Like " uh . Well they were students " but he uh " since he could not appoint them like students " he had to do APS <UNK> . Uh " they are helping him with research " with the research . But just for twenty days ? Twenty days " yeah . Yeah " but those guys are there everyday . Yeah . Aww . And ummm . And then they are " they are kind of watching <UNK> what we are doing with these two . They want to do the same thing over there . They want to bring some student " and they wanna see <UNK> how much it costs to bring ? Dijo " well " how much did you have to pay for the two students ? Le dijo " one of them was four thousand " the other was thirty-eight hundred . For tw- twenty days ? Yeah " but that includes the air . The air and their living expenses . Hello . Ooh " where were they staying at ? Uh " in an apartment " I think . In a Sheridan apartment . Wow . It is just a thirty day apartment . So " ponle que hagan ? I mean " the cheapest must be six " seven hundred dollars " no ? Nah ? There is one near by University the " whatever it is called . Is that where the hotel is gonna come handy ? The Holiday Inn ? Possibly " but that would be expensive " that would still be more expensive than an apartment . that would not be for people like them . Hmm-hmm " no . Oh . So four thousand is . I imagine the air fare must have been up there in a thousand at least . Oh yeah " umm . Three hundred plus their apartment " fifteen hundred . there is another two . Plus food . India . Thousand " food ? And so " for their services that they provided . What kind of <UNK> ? <UNK> Six hundred . I do not know . Heard they were doing research . Research . Audio . It is probably related to this . Yeah . Yeah . It is probably related to that . Probably . Mmm-hmm . So " umm " you know " it took me forever to get their check . They lost " you know the one that they said that they had mailed you ? Si ? They are still looking for it . Bah " a mí nunca me llegó ! Umm " and so then we sent another one . And " well they lost that one too . That one was hand carried " and they said they went to the provost office " I called the provost office " we do not have it . I called Ericka " and where did you send it ? because she told me she went she sent it to provost . Oh " no they said " we sent it to ORSP <UNK> . And ORSP had just told me they did not have it . I called back " he said oh " yeah I got it . Le dije " well " where is it ? It is upstairs " le dije " I am sorry " I do not know where upstairs is . What do you mean it is upstairs ? Where is upstairs ? Dice " well it is " uh " in the reception area . ORSP le dije " and where is it going next ? Digo " to the provost office . Le dije " well " le dije I put a big note that said rush . Le dije " for that reason " dije " I do not want it sitting in the reception area " it must be hand carried into the provost now . Mmm-hmm . Le dije " they leave tomorrow " you know " the day after tomorrow " I have to have the check before then . So " uh " OK . I will tell them . OK ! And I thought " since I am waiting . Mmm-hmm . I call the provost office " and they said they had kept a copy of the first one " the one that was lost . Mmm-hmm . Digo " I have a copy and <UNK> le dije " send it to me . So " they faxed it to me . The first one " the one that was lost " with signatures " all the way up to the provost office . So " I asked the president 's office whether they would accept that and all they need is just the president 's signature and we are done . It did ? Yeah " they did . So " while we are over here waiting to see where the other one went . Well " forget it . I went and had and got the copy approved . And I sent it in to Contracts and Rent . Mmm-hmm . And they approved the payment " while the others are still looking . <UNK> va a haber " va causar confusión porque <UNK> mandan al president . They will approve both . That is OK . Nothing is gonna happen with the other one . Then they called me " and said " would you like us to send the original campus mail ? No . No . Dije " I will send somebody over there to go get it . So " I sent the work study up there to go get it . Hmm . What I do not understand is that " if we have work studies that can take all the stuff over " I am sure the president 's office does too . But " maybe they just have an overwhelming amount of deliveries to make . They should have their own people I do not know . But " if they do it once a day " get them all together . The provost office or the president 's office ? The president 's office " they are the ones that lost it . I am thinking " I am surprised " I am because you are all very meticulous about making copies " you know " logging it in " logging it out . They said " for some reason we did not make a copy . They did not have a copy . They did not . And " they did not and they did not have the original . They said " the original went to Computer Science " le dije " that was two weeks ago . y luego le erraron y no llegó <UNK> . It is not there " and it is not in Computer Science . Did they send it on campus " by campus ? One time " they told me that " that they had sent me something . And I got it like three weeks later . Uh-huh . And it had been to Hinton Hall . Uh " somebody sat " in sat in somebody 's desk " you know in Hinton Hall ? Yeah . See " so " that is how these things ? I mean " it is gonna show up eventually " Yeah . But it is gonna make the rounds around campus somewhere . Si Sitting on somebody 's desk " you know ? Yeah . Para qué la quieren ? Yeah . No " porque yo " cada ratito me mandan cosas de otros " and I have to send them back . Uh-huh . Hmm . Did I tell you something about a trailer ? It is sitting there . And now he is having trouble registering the thing . He did not have ... He what ? He is having trouble registering the thing . Why ? Yeah " I did not even know you had to register the trailer . Yeah " you have to register trailers . So " he called the uh " the highway department " right ? And they said " what is the ID number ? Digo he does not have one . Dijo " well " who sold it to you ? And he is " well " I have the name of the man " and everything else " and dijo " why is not it registered ? Y dijo " I do not know " digo I just bought it from him . Digo " and how do we know he did not steal it ? Wha " how do I know that ? Digo " well I do not . Digo " I bought it from him " he has a lot of trailers . And " dijo " well " dijo " no " you cannot register unless it has been registered before . Y le dije de " so " so he was all upset because he could not register " le dije " did you tell him that he made the trailer ? No . So " he called him back yesterday again and he said " well he made the trailer because he told him " you know ? I buy parts . But you still have to register . Or broken . He buys broken trailers " and he says like he had " um . Oh . He had a whole stack of them . He says like all of these are just <UNK> The frames that are . Maybe in car accidents that were abandoned or whatever " his junkyards or whatever and then he brings them . Hmm . And then he puts floors on them and he paints them and whatever and then he sells them . He says " I do not make much profit " and I am pretty sure he does . But he says " I make maybe sixty dollars on each one . Uh-nuh . So " umm Oh . Can I borrow the key ? So " he told " he called him and told him that well you know . Uhh ... Hey . Hello . He made his trailer y digo " then we need a letter " a notarized letter from him saying that he made the trailer " that this trailer had never been owned by anybody else . You know " that he had <UNK> . Oh " you did ? Yeah . In kai " in the License Department . Y luego me dice " well " I called the Texas Commission " and they said that they all register . So " they " you cannot . Why not ? See " they told me I could . Did you tell them you were a New Mexico resident ? No . Le dije " when they ask you for your ID " it is gonna say New Mexico . They are not gonna let you register in Texas . No " dijo " no me dijeron . No " le digo " because you did not tell them that you were a New Mexico resident . You are gonna go all the way over there y le dije and that is exactly what they are gonna tell you . <UNK> parece nuevo " de veras . Y le dije " haz la carta " just do the letter . Yeah " but the man lives allá en la punta del Diablo . Pos allá no le hace . Well call him and ask him " can you meet me somewhere ? Se lo compró . Close <UNK> . You know " somewhere close to both of you . Uh-huh . Find a notary " sign the letter . Go register the trailer . No " yo no <UNK> él no va venir hasta acá . You know " I do not want to hear about this trailer anymore . That is your problem . You wanted the trailer " then <UNK> you worry about it " you have not ... Le digo " why do you make things so complicated ? What " what " what " yeah . I mean " that is what I was gonna ask you . It is just a matter of sitting down " thinking the thing through . Just have him sign the letter " that is it ! Just sign the letter " and you type the letter " you have it ready " take it to a notary . Rosy is a notary " just take it right here . Uh-huh . So " él no va querer venir hasta acá . Ask him . I am sure he will " le dije pues you know you paid him for the trailer " he is gonna come all the way over here " pero ay Señor ! No " no ? Se complica solo . Es que le gusta la vida difícil . Difícil . Le gusta hacerse la vida complicada y ... Le gusta darte problemas a tí . Le gusta ... Ah . I wanna see how long this is gonna take him " you know ? Y van a hacer lo mismo lo que le dije " de la carta " you know that is what he is gonna do . Le dije " you know from what you are telling me " it sounds really easy . You know " type the letter " get him to sign it " go register the trailer . I do not know si voy a Texas . Bueno " si uso la dirección de Rachel . It is you that is registering the trailer . Le dije " if you are gonna use Mary 's address then you have to use Mary 's ID . Rachel would have to go with you with her driver 's license " and the trailer will belong to Mary . Mmm-hmm . Then you have to go to New Mexico " and then you have to transfer to <UNK> . Do you see the ... Why does he want to do that ? Then he would have to pay twice . The difference ? Do you see the double whammy here ? Yeah " oh that is right I cannot do that either . Give me a toothpick " please . Yeah " pero no " no " no . He is not convinced " he is still gonna go to the Texas Commission " and ? But " why would he want to pay for a trailer twice ? When he can get it directly ? No " no . He wants to register it in Texas under his name " le dije " no te lo van a dar . No " pero me dijeron que sí . Pos sí " pero no les dijiste que eras residente de Nuevo Mexico . Uh-huh . Le dije " go buy a car in El Paso " and register it under your name . Le dije " the first thing they are gonna ask you for is your driver 's license . Mmm-hmm . And what does it say on your driver 's license ? New Mexico . They are gonna send you to New Mexico to register the car " same thing with a trailer . Es que si no " he says " I call . But he is not asking all the questions either . Nuh-huh . Y luego se enoja . No me dijeron . Le dije . Yeah " but you did not volunteer the information either " you know ? You have to give him all the information . Uh-huh . you know ? So ? But he does not want to hear it from you " he wants to hear it from other ... He wants to go through all the trouble " and through all the trips " and all the ... You know " you would think that after you know " he is gonna stand in line for half an hour thirty- thirty-something years " he would have learned by now . I asked my wife . And Michael is just laughing " he does not say anything . that is why he is single . Because it is the same thing . I am wrong <UNK> and nobody can tell me no . That is gonna ... that is why I am single . That is true . Ooh " that is a nice laptop . Oh " that is ? Did you finally give " uh " Israel and " and " and Frank their lap " their Macs ? I am <UNK> . A Donald we are gonna give him an increase . Yeah " he is a grad student . Because " he is a grad student . Nobody told me he was a graduate " so I appointed him as an undergraduate . Mmm . Y luego me andaron " you know le dije " esta Jenny me dijo " you know pos he is a graduate . Uh-huh . Well " yeah . Le dije " how am I supposed to know ? Nobody tells me . I just reappoint them . Well ask me ... You know ? So " yeah " pero pues if I ask you about every student I would have to be calling you on the phone every time . No " le dije when you <UNK> you wanna reappoint him pos tell me " you know " he became a graduate or ? Why " because of the pay- paid ? Mmm-hmm . Yeah " they get paid more . Pay rate ? They get paid more . He went from fifteen four ? to twenty-two fifty . So " it is about six thousand dollar increase " that is ... that is why he is always " that is why he was always crying . Who ? Th ? Donald ? Yeah . He went from twenty-two ? From fifteen four to twenty-two five . Oh . that is like a ? Big jump Big jump . Big jump . So " ya hice la cuen- ya hice el cambio y todo . Hmm ? So " so " yeah . Well " then you know " when they get their check " that is when I find out . Well " I was supposed to become a graduate or whatever " you know " but I do not know . I will try and remember to send you a list of all of those that I am going to appoint because I do not even have the list of the TA's yet " for the fall . You are not gonna get them until August . Mmm-hmm . Because ? Se parece a mi Pepper . How is your Oh " so cute ! How is your " how is your puppy doing <UNK> ? Ay <UNK> . The power supplies of <UNK> . The power of silence . She is so cute . Es tan juguetona . Cómo te esta yendo ? Ya creció mucho ? Si " eahh " it is a female . Si " cansa a " a " a " a la Lola y luego le digo ven niña y pum ! Sale corriendo . La baby " la puppy ? Yeah " la baby . Because she loves attention . Y Lola " y la Toti ... La Toti . No se encela ? Si " fi- al principio sí se celaba . Pero ahora no " ahora she gets protective of her y luego se " la cansa . La chiquita cansa a la grande " y allá se sienta la grande . Y luego así que le brinca y le jala la oreja y le jala la cola y le muerde aquí y le muerde allá y nomás le hace así . Lola nomás le mueve las patas . Y ella brinque y brinque hasta que ya se cansa también . Ah " pero como le encanta el agua . Se enloda todo los días . Tengo que bañarla porque se enloda . So " she is a mean bigger than Toti verdad ? <UNK> más grande que Toti . Oh " sí . Mucho más grandota . Pero tiene una carita tan bonita . Yeah " I saw the pictures . Y es tan " tan tierna . She loves people . I thought Toti loves people " but this one is worse . And " es un circo para bañarla en la tina . La primera vez que le intenté " me bañe yo primero que ella . Y ella feliz en la tina . Pos para sacarla todo un lío porque no quería salirse de la tina . Really ? Las patitas así . Así como Martha cuando metió al Rufus . Sí ? You have not seen her dog " verdad ? It is like " it is like Scooby . No . Haz de cuenta el Scooby Doo . He is like Scooby . El Scooby-Doo así grandote . Tonto " está tontolon el perro . Digo " y que lo va metiendo al shower y el shower tiene de esos sliding doors . So " there is only that much open in a sliding door " verdad ? Lo abrió Roger y levantó al perro pos nomás vio el deste del perro y le hizo las manos así . Las patas . Y no entraba el perro en el shower y luego le daba vuelta así . Dijo " Martha " yo no le podía ayudar a Roger porque me caía de risa de ver al perro . Con las manos así . Y Roger " well do something " and help me . Dijo " volteaba de lado " así le hacía así de todas maneras " <UNK> pero de lado así lo ponía de frente " lo volteaba al revés por atrás . Y que las patas . Movía las manos " no le hace como lo volteaba " <UNK> parecía un avión . Así estaba de chiquita . Se me resbalaba. Ponía las patitas así . Y a poco . Metió al shower y andaba Roger todo <UNK> cansado Roger . Haz de cuenta " you get so tired y al fin . So heavy " he is big . Si " por fin la agarré y le eché una toalla y se la di a mijo y le digo toma tú secala en lo que agarro la otra y en lo que me di la vuelta se le escapó . Tuve que agarrarla . <UNK> porque cree que esta jugando . But " she is brown " no ? Cómo cafecita " no ? Es cafecita con negro oscuro " o mas bien dark brown with light brown . Mmm-hmm . Ya esta creciendo . Sí " chico tamañote . How long have you had her " a week " two weeks ? Uh " three weeks ? Three weeks . Y ya creció " no te creas . Si " pues sí mira el perro que tiene ? <UNK> También ya . Cómo va ? Si " muy grandote también . Ya va creciendo and he still thinks he is a big little puppy . And " that is the thing . Y le hace así <UNK> . <UNK> agacharme para untarle algo <UNK> no se que " me brincó el perro <UNK> de trompa " me tumbó en el sofa me caí <UNK> el stupid dog . Oye " ya estuvo bueno " no ? Agarró a la grandma y ... Uh-huh . Agarró a la grandma . Bueno " say goodbye babies " we are going to say good-bye now . Goodbye . Bye . A ver " dónde " cómo se le apaga a esto ? Lunch is over now . 