— No ! Que no . Que no pue ’ se ’ , que esto no es normal . – Qué ? le pregunté , dreading his response . Porque when we’d first entered El Chino , he’d whispered to me , — Esto no me gusta , Susana . Parece que nos van a estafar , eh ? Y yo , tan inocente entonces , only a couple of hours earlier , le había asegurado — que no , Pablo . Que este lugar es para insiders . Not for tourists , te lo prometo . – Que no ! Que nos quieren cobrar 90 pesos , joder . All of us , like five Sleeping Beauties jerked awake by the kiss ( of death ! ) de esa cuenta trucha , began to shriek . No way , oh my god , there was no price list , where’d they get $90 ? And so on . Bahram began to gesticulate and armar frases litigiosas y levemente amenazantes . I felt better . Como protegida . Pero around us , la gente comenzó a mirarnos medio feo . Ni siquiera nos habíamos dado cuenta de que entre todo el revolú , there had been a change of performers : ahora cantaba un viejo alto , espigado , de elegantes cabeshos blancos . At least helooksthe part , pensé . But I was already up , squeezing entre el bench y la pared , shoving aside shoulders and knees , followed by the Juvenile and Pierre . As we passed el cantante , I heard , como desde un slo-mo sueño , que éste componía y cantaba en el acto letras tangueras about us , about rude ehtranjeros who left half-way through el show ! Esto , pensé — ever daddy’s girl — es la tradición oral en Bahram , en su conversación con la tango mistress , had learned que en efecto , no “ era normal " que nos cobraran los $90 , since we’d paid $40 for the dinner . Pablo , alentado con esta información , insistía con el mozo : — que no , y punto . Esto no es normal , coño . Ya pagamos la consumición y novamos a pagar el show . Ve y pregúntaselo a El Chino si quieres . Eso es , pregúntaselo , anda . El mozo , tras consultar sotto vocecon el dueño , retornó medio crestfallen , shaking his jet-black bucles , with the Chino-certified price : $40 . Triunfantes , ignoring the dirty looks de demás comensales and the now frankly hostile spontaneous riffs about our premature exit del abueleril cantante , we were spewed , Jonah-like onto la vereda . As we waited for “ Onda Verde , " observamos , incrédulos , the hordes of hopefuls , huddled about las dos ventanas , who hadn’t managed to get a seat in “ Bar El Chino . " P.S. Dos semanas después , after Pablo and Bahram had departed to their respective “ patrias " ( Pablo a su cátedra in an Andalusian university and Bahram to an important northernCalifornia law firm ) , apareció yet another article on tango , this time in the Sunday revista of the local diario , Clarín . “ Un boom que llega a todo el mundo , " heralded the article , titled “ Fenómeno Tango . " In a lengthy sidebar about “ El Chino " ( described as “ un bar maravillosamente descascarado , barroco y hechicero " ) , la rubia destartalada aquella , named Cristina de los Angeles , announces triumphantly , “ Hoy tenemos gente de Irán , Suecia , el Japón , Francia , y España . " Pablo , this one is para vos . IV Blood/Relations Crónica 28 junio 2001 Buenos Aires Para Etienne Joseph y para Jorge Mariscal Writing away estaba , en una tale of 3 sisters . Concentration broken , interrumpida por el ring ring y no suelo contehtar siempre dejo la máquina pero something caught me y atendí y era Betty Galant , RECTORA del colegio del Juvenil , and it all was so fast so fast y yo que sólo ayer me estuve medio casi congratulating on my charming , sentient , politically aware boy , my boitjie , adolescente . . . . . . y Betty Galant diciendo está bien , Joey está bien pero ... ehte , cometió un “ acto irreflexivo " ( so Argentine , esto ! ) y quisiera que vengas a recogerlo , llevarlo a casa y para que reflexione . Se cortó la mano un poco , eso es . Y yo en piyama furious , me SACA de onda que me humishen , Joey sabe ehto . . . cómo sigo en piyama ? Y ahora rehearsing my speech de madre concerned , calm , NORMAL ( I’m worried about being “ normal , " living in “ Villa Freud " ? ) , ante la Rectora eh ah , soy ehcritora como Ud . sabe , trabajo en casa , perdone mi tardanza , ni siquiera ehtuve vehtida . . . Oh god . ( Y el step-daddy suele ocuparse , this year at least , aquí en Buenos Aires , de estos asuntos del Juvenil tipo colegio , pero he’s out , ay he’s out and where are the tetanus shot medical records ? Has he or hasn’t he ? Mind a blank ) . Y qué digo , me muero de vergüenza y rabia y otra vez su famosa temper , que a mí me gusta achacársela a su padre , digo al bio-dad , pero claro hay que reconocer que yo también , claro , soy fogosísima como dicen aquí y me arrabio pero eso sí , me calmo al tiro , NUNCA me pongo violenta , ni pego , ni tiro and I NEVER NEVER hold a grudge . Bueno me visto , un poco de Estée Lauder “ Candied Fig " lipstick , holdover color from the 80s que hicieron relaunch a few years ago , fijate que primero lo había comprado en el Macy’s de Union Square , en San Francisco , me acuerdo ( la misma época del bewitching , emblemático “ 7e Sens " de Rykiel ) , y luego I replaced it en esa hermosa farmacia en Zurich , con el Rudi Haas . Anyway , I lance myself , salgo a la calle , camino y behind my Calvin Klein subtly Jackie-O gafas de sol pienso , “ I look pretty good , " y pienso en Pablo Zambrano , in our cultivated myopia , and in how damn FINE the world looks sin receta . And now , everything too sharp , ay las arihtas . . . Shego al Colegio me siento como una niña , como una colegiala . They buzz me in , una recepcionihta takes pity on me y me sube a Rectoría , tercer piso , past shrieking forest-green sweatered kids mirándome y algún murmusho , te lo juro : allí va la mamá de Joey . . . Entro y veo a la Rectora , una cool beige-y bottle blonde ( of course ) , still con ese semi-incongruente ( sha es invierno , no jodas ! ) hideous orangey bronceado que usan tantas porteñas y me besa y veo al Juvenil and my heart is in my throat y se ve un poquitín alicaído eso sí , e intenta susurrarme en inglés let me tell you what happened , OK , mama ? Y yo callate voh , y noBLOOD/ quiero ehcuchar NADA de ti ahora . Y la Rectora entona que Joey es un buen chico pero en algunas cosas todavía sigue siendo muuuy niño . Y yo nodding politely . Ehhh , sabés que hay un grupito de chicos un poco más jóvenes que le vienen molestando , y calling him “ shanki " and pulling on his jacket ( y forro , he whispers under his breath , they call me forro ) . And it’s me back , scared , en Colegio Estudio en Madrith , I’m 4 years old and asthmatic and no puedo respirar and I’m wheezing , I’m wheezing y los otros niños me peshihcan por ser . . . por ser extranjera , skinny , shy , pigeon-toed and pathetic . Y me tengo que agarrar de la mano de la maestra , with all my might hold her hand y subir con ella al ático where she keeps that wonderful , banana-smelling , pungent rubbing alcohol que ella frota frota on the kids ’ knees cuando se caen and they scrape themselves . Yo nunca me caigo , bueno , sólo si me empujan . Siempre de la mano de la maestra and clinging to the fence and shrieking to Daddy to take me back , take me home , y mamá no me puede shevar al cole , hace que papá me lleve porque ella no aguanta , no puede ver a su hyper-sensitive , socially maladapted oldest daughter in so much pain . . . . . . y como te digo , sigue la Rectora creo que Sho-ey debería pagar la reparación de la puerta de sus ahorros ; recibe una mensualidad ? Like in a dream le asiento , sí , claro . And I muse : Y resulta que he couldn’t stand it , the name-calling , y se explotó y le comienzo a construir defensas , que young male adolescent pero pa ’ mis adentros , that doesn’t cut it . I despisea bully ; cómo me torturaron los bullies , right through till I was his age , como de 14 o 15 o maybe even as late as 16 , and I grew breasts and a funny bone just like my daddy’s and slanty green eyes and long , long wavy auburn hair and todo tan y tan de repente , cuando volví de España a Santa Cruz en la high school , 11th grade . Era cotizada de repente , hasta MUY cotizada , hasta nominada for Homecoming Princess , funny how that all happened , so suddenly , pero Joey . Popular desde day one . Tan canchero , friendly , y ahora shoe en el otro pie baby , y cómo puede ser que le hasha salido esa veta de su padre ( and him , from his ownalcoholic , pathologically shy father ) : explosiva , de kicking a hole in the closet door , in the wall , y ahora esto , running after the younger kid ( I wasn’t gonna hit him Mom , I swear ) y rodeado de sus classmates , quienes le chishaban “ maTAlo , Joey , maTAlo . " Ay , it’s just too much for me on this winter morning , esta terrible writerly interrupción and Joey SOOOOOLord of the Flies , and I abhor male violence especially . Oh what begot this , y sho tramándole castigos yes yes I’m gonna have him read Lord of the Flies , and of course , pagar el cristal roto out of his savings and oh my god , casi me colapseo en shanto hearing que un poor little boy , nothing to do with it all , behind the door the Juvenile pushed his hand through , por poco se le incruhta un glass shard en el ojo . Oh god , oh god for what almost happened could’ve happened , y yo paralizada de shame y miedo y veo que el Juvenil is ashamed too y él nunca ha aguantado la sensación de culpa pero luego he tries to weasel his way out of it siempre tan ready to blame someone else , or “ his temper . " Al llegar a casa me siento on the floor y shoro y me siento totally overwhelmed , wiped out por la maternidad , suddenly . Por esto , by something like this , que te golpea in the middle of whatever you were doing : writing , living , y siempre es , no matter what , mi más important empresa , pasión , so much . Too much . Siempre he tardado tanto en mis cosas , en “ realizarme , " all my goals and now so closeto it all , to writing , to closure . Finally , finally . Beginning to taste it . Pero te pueden derribar en cualquier momento , kids . I remember cuando él nació : I sat for months on end just bounce bounce bouncing him , con el pie , in that little bouncyhamaca thing , staring at him , making him laugh . I would doBLOOD/ anything , I would die for you , como dijo el protagonista in that gorgeous “ Cal " movie , con el Mark Knopfler soundtrack . Bueno , ya sé que era el amante , young Irish revolutionary guerrilla to his Protestant older woman lover , pero da lo mihmo : lo que quiero decir es una imbancable intensidad . Y esto , hoy , is suddenly beyond me . ¿Qué hago ? Propongo cursishos de “ anger management " when we get home . Muy a lo gringo . Le hablo about how when we get home , que el re-entry into a gringo high school . No va a ser fácil . Que peer pressure . Que si no dominás tu temper , how are you going to be able to drive ? Que I ain’t putting no out of control Archie Bunker temper-tantrummer behind el volante ! No way ! Y , si sales con una chica y te dice que no , que take me home , que no quiero go further que I’m not ready , what are you going to do ? Put your hands around her neck and hold her there , hold her down against her will , muy “ Cuello de gatito negro " ? Y casi llorando y bien palidito me mira y dice I don’t know Mom , what , am I a monster ? Siempre con el discurso of I’m gonna change . I’m gonna start cleaning up my room , it’s ALL gonna be different when we get back . Que fresh slate . Y pa ’ mis adentros ay , that is SOOO much el clásico discurso de un alcohólico . Of an addict . Image de mi ex-suegro burning in my brain . You pickled old sod : why are you STILL alive , pathetic and alone and drinking yourself . . . but NOT to death , not yet . And Ida , mi suegra , fresh in the grave , y ella tan buena , tan vivaz . Y no quiero . No quiero put all that guilt crap and heredity shit on Joey , with his bandaged wrist and his beautiful dark almond eyes . Y así , le diseño un self-improvement course on paper : 1 ) write an essay about how this situation could have been resolved without the use of force 2 ) pay for broken glass with allowance 3 ) leer Lord of the Fliesy analizar su moraleja . Esto basta ? Is he damaged ? Will he be all right ? Am I ? V Celos Pasional Crónica 14 julio 2001 Buenos Aires For Suzinn “ Lee " Weiss Mamá y papá , after their flechazo meeting en la cubierta de ese Transatlantic liner carrying them to a study abroad program en Madrid en el verano del ‘ 49 ( I think ) , y after su cross-cultural , tumultuous courtship que terminó en una modesta boda en el front lawn de mis abuelos Chávez en San Diego , Califas , y after el subsecuente distanciamiento de papá de su familia judía de New York ( especialmente de su mamá , Grandma Edna ) pues , what other kind of a marriage could they be expected to have ? Except the one they had : intense , loud , sarcastic , grand gestures , mucho grito y polémica y door slamming y bailes y cocktail parties y viajes y lágrimas y risa y una vez mamá hasta nos llevó a mí y a mi hermana , over night , a un hotel en Santa Mónica . All the way to the beach . Mom was an excellent driver . Hasta enseñó a conducir a papá . No easy task porque Daddy had been raised in New York City y nunca . He’d never had to ! Y además , I have to admit , tenía un pretty bad sense of direction . Pero ella , she’d learned how to drive on the open California roads con sus tíos in their big , low American cars . Mamá was good , pero ojo , if anyone cut her off nos pedía ( ella tan señorita , tan correcta , never a palabrota out of her mouth ) : honey , roll down your window , will you , and give that guy the finger ? Or si veía , en los L.A. freeways , a algún movie star pues eso podía ser un poquito dangerous porque Mom would speed up para arrimársele y saludar , como esa vez que she was sure , and yes , I think it actually was him , she rolled down her window and shouted , “ Hey , Ernie ! " y definitivamente , it was Ernest Borgnine . Creo que esa vez , de ese fight cuando mamá nos llevó a Santa Mónica , que hasta nos llevó a Pacific Ocean Park , pero that may have been another time . Pero for sure I know que lo único que cenamos was hot dogs , and we loved it . Y claro , luego , mucha llamada telefónica y finally they made up como siempre y nos fuimos back home . Uno de los peores momentos in all their long , romantic , starcrossed , movie-star marriage fue un verano cuando yo tenía como 16 o 17 años . Recuerdo que yo y mis hermanas nos dimos cuenta de que era the middle of the afternoon y mamá no se había levantado . Both my parents were early risers , so this was pretty strange . Papá estaba en un research trip , en España . Bajamos a su recámara , y mamá se encontraba en negligee , distractedly munching See’s chocolates . — ¿Qué te pasa , mamá ? le pregunté . Mom is a Scorpio y , TRUE to her sign , es muy apasionada , contundente y vengativa . Pero eso no significa en absoluto que ella sea self-revealing , easy to read o como quien dice , emotionally available . Al contrario : guarded , secretive . — Oh nothing , nos dijo . Siguió así un tiempo , como staring out the window , out through the northern Califas pine trees , down over the small , bucolic , hippie-surf town al que Daddy had moved us so we wouldn’t turn into Valley Girls and so his glaucomic eyes no tuvieran que soportar el daily commute through the smoggy Los Angeles basin . Mamá miraba , entre aturdida y ensoñada , toward the Pacific Ocean , her beautiful tilted black eyes clouded de angustia . Pero no decía nada . Yo sentía ominous waves de malestar . Y persistí . — Mom , si no me dices qué tienes voy a pensar que es algo terrible . Like you have cancer or something , le dije . And I’m gonna call Dad . At the mention of his name , irrumpió en llanto y anunció , finalmente , en tono altamente melodramático ( typical of Mom , pero lo compramos every time ) : — Girls , I’m sureDaddy is having an affair . Con eso , se lanzó a un torrente de palabras : I’m going to lose 20 pounds rinse my hair back to black voy a mudarme a San Diego con mis padres start teaching again lo voy a dejar , sí , it’s over , this is it . Pero mamá , we reasoned , how do you know ? En sus slender , hermosos dedos she held out , away from her body y como con una mueca de asco , extended toward us , un pale yellow sobre . Weopened it . We read it . — Pero mamá , le dije , this doesn’t prove anything . In his absence , Daddy had given Mom carte blanche to take care of his mail . The offending letter era una carta de una ex-novia de papá , de hace décadas . Pues ahora se divorciaba del marido , y le había mandado a Daddy un let’s catch up , let’s meet for . . . letter , con lujo de detalles wannabe seductores about sunbathing semi-desnuda en su Oregon backyard , con su miniature poodle correteando by her feet . Stuff like that . Daddy was a Libra . Guapo . Smooth . Urbane . Funny as hell . Con una voz rica , low , melodiosa . En primer lugar , tendría que haber sabido la mujer ( Jean , me acuerdo que se llamaba ) that Daddy was notfond of dogs . He was a cat person . Pero ni modo . Le dijimos , Mom , the only thing this proveses que esta mujer has the hots for Dad . That’s all . Pero mamá would have none of it . Of reason . Según ella , it was all over . Guilty as charged . Guilty even beforethe trial ! Así era mamá , desde siempre . Y llamadas telefónicas a Madrid . DeMadrid . A Selma , la amiga de la familia donde papá se hospedaba . Que would you please tell Joe I’m leaving him . Que llamadas de papá , histérico , June , whaaat ? Don’t be ridiculous , I never . . . slam the phone down . Todo esto , of course , waaay before Email and cheap , deregulated international calls . Esto era a puro telegrama . STOP . Ramo de rosas . STOP . Lágrimas y gritos transatlánticos y finally . Yes . Daddy actually cut short his research trip . By a whole week . Furioso , resignado , enamorado , Daddy regresó a casa to the tribunal that was awaiting him . Porque eso debería de haber sido una jodienda : four women , todas taking mami’s side , putting him — el gran catedrático , world-renowned orador — on trial . La realidad era que papá no había hecho nada . Ni siquiera había visto a la tal Jean in over 20 years . Pero eso sí , we put him through the wringer . Daddy was beautiful , y supongo que women were pretty much always throwing themselves at him . Claro like Kissinger said , el poder es el máximo afrodisíaco . So it doesn’t even matter , un hombre puede ser barrigudo , calvo , gordo , feo y atroz pero if he’s perceived to have power ( y hasta puede ser un poder metafórico , académico , I mean come on ! ) I guess there’ll always be chix lined up at the ready . Y los poor men . Ni cuenta se dan . They think it’s all about them . Their seductiveness . Their irresistibleness . Ay pobres . . . Pero anyway una vez , cuando le acompañé a Daddy al MLA en San Francisco , una huevona actually tried to hit on him ( una chilena wannabe novelihta ) . Luego me vio a mí , y se imaginaba que I was his young lover y desistió ! As if ! Pero ojo : mamá gave as good as she got , porque también hubo muchas escenas like the time I remember Daddy shouting if that French jerk ever calls here again ( por un colega de mamá en un high school en Los Angeles where she taught French and Spanish ; el pobre franchute had fallen hard for her ) , that’s it . I’m leaving . You’ll never see me again ! Pero anyway , we put him through the wringer that time about la Jean , como decía . Hasta going through a box of old stuff encontramos una foto de su ex-novia , la judía mexicana Sofía he was engaged to before he even met Mom ( she was pretty cute , pero nothing compared to mamá ) y allí mamá se enfureció de nuevo que what are you doing still with this old picture , Joe ? Y bueno , finalmente la tiró . Or maybe la escondió de nuevo , who knows for sure ? Pero eso sí : le hicimos sacar la dirección de Jean out of his address book y le dijimos todas a una , well , if you don’t “ want anything , " por qué le haces encourage ? Y después . . . pues era un total mogollón de diets , sulks ( que why did you ruin my research trip to Madrid ? Well , why did youruin my life ? Oh , I never should have met you . Well , me neither ) , screaming , stony silences , dinners out , miradas encendidas y finally , finally todo volvió eventually a su cauce . Y of course they didn’t break up . Not then , not ever . Y ese matrimonio de mis padres carried on just like that hasta que murió papá . O casi . Porque Daddy al final hay que reconocer was not himself , at all . The second time que le dio el cáncer I mean , after he’d licked it once and recovered , we thought . Y fue con mami a su second honeymoon back to Spain . Eso fue en 1988 Pero the second time it came , en noviembre de ese mismo año , he said not again . Not now , no quiero . And he just let himself go . And we let him go . Esa segunda vez , after the chemo , and after the rayos and he never lost his beautiful white hair pero se puso all enjuto y amarillento y tan enfermo muy enfermo mi papá . . . Y en una , close to the end , mamá nos dijo you girls are wrong . You think Daddy was sexy and romantic and funny all the time ? No . Daddy es un melancólico . It’s not easy living with him , it’s never been easy , you know . Daddy is never satisfied with himself , and he has terriblemoods , and self-doubt and . . . Pero eso fue más bien hacia el final final . Cuando nos dijo eso . And even a year or so before he died a veces , en una comida familiar or just sitting around their living room , someone playing the piano , alguien cantando en mi tan , muy musical familia , Daddy era capaz de abstraerse de la escena circundante and a radiant light would come over his face y miraba a mamá y a veces hasta murmuraba , girls , isn’tMother beautiful ? Y bueno . The moral of the story is que una vez in the dining room de la pensión donde nos hospedábamos en San Sebastián , ( Euskadi , Spain ) yo , mis padres , mi hermana Laura y mi prima Lee , me acuerdo que I was eating espinacas a la crema y una milanesa de ternera , my favorite . Y mis padres were asking me ( again ) que por qué siempre tenía que decir que nuncame iba a casar ? Que after all they’d taught us , que por qué y cómo yo era capaz de manifestar tanto desprecio for that institution which they so successfully embodied ? Y . . . ( pausa porteña ) nada más les pude decir well , that’s just it ! Your marriage is so good , no sé si “ good " es la right word , quiero decir : so larger-than-life que tengo la sensación de que anythingI would have , with no matter whom , pues como que it just could not measure up . Y ellos , shaking their heads , desesperados de que su success augurara , para mí , mi fracaso , por poco lloraban de rabia y de ( let’s face it ) a lo mejor un poquitín de vergüenza that their muy marriageable oldest daughter steadfastly refused to enter into holy ( or otherwise ) matrimony . Y así fue como paradójicamente llegué al convencimiento de que marriage inevitably amortigua el deseo , lima el misterio y posterga all those good things siempre so far out of reach we’re always looking for . Porque eso ( o así me parecía ) , habían tenido mis padres Joe and June in their montaña rusa of a matrimonio . VI Memory/Lame Crónica 22 agosto 2001 Los Angeles Para JHS , in memoriam Daddy , were you really thatmean ? Mi hermanita Laura — y mi abuela Eunice Chávez también for that matter , whom you adored , who loved you — te recuerdanbienmean . Bien sarcastic . Con todo el mundo . To mom . Laura se acuerda de un fight daddy and mom got into over politics ( maybe the death penalty ? No , era over legalizing la mota ! Yeah , that was it ) , donde no se hablaron por días . Or , Mom went to a motel for two days . Pero quizás este es el mismo ( sub)urban myth de cuando ella nos llevó a un hotel en la playa en Santa Mónica and all we ate for a while was hot dogs ? ( Les dicen “ panchos " en Buenos Aires , can you believe that ? ) Pero no . I’m surethat fight was about celos , y que se estaban chasing around the bed in our old house , in the Valley , on Rubio Ave . Or maybe it was the one before that , en Van Nuys ? Pero anyway , they were swinging wire hangers pathetically at each other , y mami took me and my other sister , Sarita , a un hotel near Pacific Ocean Park . Laura ni siquiera había nacido . Yeah , that’s it . I’m sure . Or am I ? Daddy , try as I might , no te puedo conjurar mean . Oh , I know you were ruthless con tus enemigos . And you had tonsof them . Que anti-semitas coming out of the woodwork . Que people who didn’t vote your way en los comités en UCLA . Esa vez que no te quisieron dar , al principio , un ascenso to Super Professor Step 8 overscale or whatever they do in the UC system , and you got into a rage . Bigtime . Enemigos ideológicos . Intelectuales . Académicos . In your journal articles , in obscure footnote vendettas , and in Letters to the Editor columns you waged your battles , esas épicas batallas letradas que te carcomieron , finalmente , por dentro . Esa rabia que te tragabas por lo general , only every so often letting just a flicker of it cloud your Robert Goulet , Harry Belafonte , Lucho Gatica surface , ignite and explode , en un perfectly timed and hurled sarcastic put down . To mami . And to us ? Así dicen . Even to me ? Yote recuerdo como un expansive huraño . Ya sé , Daddy . That’s an oxymoron . And so you were . Un cool-warm Libra . Un dulce melancólico en tu study en casa , shaking your head back and forth en ese gesto milenario , casi rabínico , about some historical injustice , alguna tragedia you felt as keenly on your own skin cual si te la hubieran perpetrado — tatuado — a ti . Daddy , te reconozco en los versos de “ Notes Toward a Supreme Fiction , " de Wallace Stevens , que recité full- and lowvoiced , dry-eyed , en tu yahrzeit . Just days after my birthday . El 25 de marzo , 1990 fue . One year and two days after.MEMORY/ He had to choose.But it was not a choice Between excluding things.It was not a choice Between but of.He chose to include the things That in each other are included the whole , The complicate the amassing harmony . Ese día te sentí — I conjured you — en esos reconfortantes , sencillos , casi parcos versos . Y dije , entonces , “ Thus , my father was able to be , harmoniously , a boy from the Bronx and a renowned Golden Age scholar , someone impassioned by Sephardic ballads , Cervantes and Lope de Vega , but also by Peter Sellars or The Beatles . " Concluí citando — y diciendo querer emular — otra de tus frases favoritas : “ [ La vida ] es el arte de no renunciar a nada . " Don’t remember now who said that . Lope ? Cervantes ? Think so . Pero part of me never wanted to sip from the same cup que te nutrió a ti . I didn’t want — yet I was fatally drawn to — los clásicos . Hell , si no hubiera sido por Pizarnik , habría hecho , casi seguro , una tesis sobre Cortázar . O Quevedito . Remember , Daddy ? I remember , now , clearly , you and I , escribiendo late late into the night , juntos , en tu casa en Santa Cruz , inspirados encendidos , hours and hours thinking about that one line : “ polvo será , mas polvo enamorado . " What bullshit , Dad . How could I have written , how could I have said that day , tan smugly , tan literarily , que you were able to be both — all — harmoniously ? Cuando OB-vio ( pronunciación porteñísima ) the trying , los choices gnawed at your insides all along ? Desde tus 26 años , desde la úlcera que te pegaste cuando tu mamá , La Monte ( aka Grandma Edna Maslow ) quiso prevenir que te casaras con mami y te mudaras a Califas from New York and some doctor or shrink , qué sé sho , te aconsejó , well sonny boy , it’s your mother or your wife : you pick . And you did , you did . But at what price ? Daddy . Just like el Caballero de la Triste Figura , the study of whom made you famous , eras solitario even en toda tu solidaridad humana . En realidad , un fantasioso . Incluso algo mesiánico . Try as I might , no puedo recordarte mean . I try to conjure you stern , and instead I hear you snort with laughter sobre los ridículos , amateurish “ professional " musicians — esos Musicians of Brementown : todos off-key , mal vestidos y hasta inhabiting an ill-concealed , unsavory bordering-on-incestuous relationship , la madre-hijo team on the piano , te acuerdas ? — en ese unforgettable Sofía Noel concert en Madrid en 1979 Yeah , fuimos con Selma . En el Centro Cultural de la Villa , en Colón . O te veo casi llorando , crooning along with James Taylor’s first album : “ Suzanne , the plans you made , put an end to you . . . . " Intento recordar tu legendario temper , and instead te veo sneaking me , at age 12 , into the drive-in para ver “ Midnight Cowboy " on a re-run . What is it about memory ? ¿Qué es lo que hace que Laura te recuerde tan ( auto ) exigente , tan distante ? Y que yo , en cambio , vea una jumble de imágenes solapadas en el tiempo y el espacio , pero en casi todas — even when that little muscle at the side of your jaw is twitching — casi siempre you end up collapsing into a snort of laughter ? Qué es lo que me permite ( me obliga ) creer fervientemente que esa crueldad tuya was a self-defense mechanism ? El modo de resguardarse , de escudarse de un hombre , de un working-class , Bronx Jew-boy who grew up to be famous and handsome and suave and world-traveled and elegant ( and who even taught me to waltz ) pero who never outgrew laMEMORY/ inseguridad de haber sido short , miope , poor , hijo de una inmigrante rusa judía y de un inmigrante rumano judío under ( and later directamente ) unemployed , y encima divorciados . Ese Yossie , the smallest boy en la Bronx ganga , the one they used as mensajero because he was the littlest , el que corría más rápido cuz he was the scaredest . Ese boy was always inside you , Dad . Yossie . You never outgrew him . You never outran him del todo . El hizo que practically on your deathbed me insistieras , me recordaras , “ Sukie , you know , remember : tengo over 300 items on my C.V. " I know you did , Daddy . Y ese knowledge pierced me , wounded me , fucked me up for years , even warpedme , diría . Cursed me con la misma jodida inseguridad and need for approval from others you took with you to your grave . Yo he aprendido a echarle la culpa al Saturn in the twelfth House , Sun in Aries , en la cuarta . Pero it’s you , Daddy . I’m always looking over my shoulder pa ’ ver dónde estás . Are you watching me ? Do you like what you see ? Do you ? Ah , why did I ever have to become a writer ? Pero so much of you in me , qué más podría haber hecho ? What else could I ever do ? Is it a Jewish thing , esta never-satisfaction ? An oldest child thing ? ¿Sólo un modo de ser melancólico , compartido entrañablemente ? Nunca sabré , and I can’t ask you . Pero I do ask you , almost every day . Ay Daddy , por qué esta mi urgencia de ti ? Quién me definiría como sick , a veces ( me ) pregunto , por hablarte , buscarte todos los días without fail ? When will you leave me alone ? ¿Por qué me dejaste ? VII Tecolote Crónica 14 agosto 2003 Oaxaca , México Para June A. Chávez Silverman , in memoriam Mom , el día que descansaste it rained here en México . En Oaxaca , to be precise . No precisamente el México that you knew — creo que nunca estuviste this far south — pero it may as well have been . Because , la última vez que volví a Guadalajara , in 1997 , para celebrar mi ternura , as I call it ( such a more gorgeous word for the thing than the real word for “ tenure , " la permanencia . No , I refuse the “ real " translation . I prefer la ternura . Tenderness ) . — I know , ya sé , mamá . It’s not the real word for it and I should speak right . La gente va a creer que I don’t know right from wrong . Pero tú ya no estás para retarme , and I’ve always done my own thing anyway , que no ? Pero anygüey , as I was saying , the last time I was in Guadalajara , for that LASA conference en el ‘ 97 , everything had changed . Pero everything . Of course , uno diría . Que twenty years son veinte años , y toda la cosa . Even so , yo buscaba en Guadalajara el México que tú y daddy me habían dado . The México with smashed guayabas releasing that rubber-sweet , acrid scent into the pale ochre dirt . ( I always thought that dirt was so red , hasta ver la tierra colorada de Misiones province , in Argentina . ) The México of dim , indio-filled markets — like my favorite of all time , el Libertad en downtown Guadalajara — sudor , huarache-leather and wood-burning tool smells , masa harina before , during and after cooking , chiles de todo tipo , secos y frescos , aguas de melón , atole , hanging animal guts everywhere , and strange , pale , slimy , hacked-open frutas we used to sneak huge , liquid gulping bites of , con mi hermana Sarita y un verano , con mi primo Carlitos , even though you expressly forbade us to . You forbid us from eating anything from street vendors and no way del Mercado — salty , perfumed pepino y mango enchilado al limón on a stick , steamed elotes floating in admittedly dicey-looking water in rusty vats — nothing en la calle . Bueno , that México . El de los shiny , giant metallic-green mayates we used to tie strings to and they’d buzz in enraged circles over our heads . El de los roadside fields and empty lots and everywhere you looked que no estuviera edificado you could see esas florcitas pink . Those caterpillar-fuzzy , candycolored plumes we used to slip out of their stiff outer stalk and take home to you , al atardecer , después de todo el día estar afuera , montados en las vacas de los Gallegos , teasing Nacho — el weirdo teen neighbor we used to think was like un Boo Radley tapatío — about the eternal ringworm on his cheek , or catching salamanders con los rich López Moreno neighbor boys . Miguel , el impossibly old 12 year old y mi novio Alejandro , who at age 9 solemnly asked me to hold his watch for him mientras jugaba al fútbol or when he went to hacer pis behind a tree . Mami , te llevábamos muchas tardes a sweat-smashed child’s bouquet de esas pinks : — son malas hierbas , nos decías . They’re just weeds , girls ! Pues ese México ya no existe en mi Zapopan de antaño . I always thought we lived way out in the country all that time , growing up . Pero cuando volví en el ‘ 97 , it had stretched and morphed into just another Guadalajara suburb , con su Blockbuster y todo . Pero ni modo , Mom . Porque tu México sí lo encontré : en Oaxaca . Hot , chapopote-scented roads as you ride into the city center del tiny aeropuerto . Burros ambulantes y green mayates galore . Those enormous , dizzying , masa- , rope- , chile- and entraña-smelling mercados you only used to let us go to once in a blue moon , donde nos llevaba Juana Delgado a veces . Y nos traía greasy churros she bought there , en el Libertad , once a week : hot , sugared , fat . No como los skinny cold ones que venden en el San Diego Zoo or on Olvera Street y les dicen “ churros . " Oaxaca is yourMéxico , Mom , aunque nunca fuiste . Even down to the rain . A sudden hush , y a las 2:30 una llovizna como lace hairnet cae de un cielo repentinamente cerrado en nube . At noon , precisamente ( las 10 , Califas time ) , en el Mercado Central de Abastos , el olor a nardos me arrebató de mí misma . I felt no center , suddenly , like on that Boardwalk ride cuando el centrifugal force smashes and holds you flat against the metal walls y de repente the floor falls out , cual si flotara nomás among those dim market stalls , aware only of the overpowering , lyrical , death-pronóstico scent : spikenard , le dicen en la Biblia . It’s tuberose . Mi perfume predilecto . One of my students looked it up for me en el Internido , cuando apareció la referencia a nardos in that Lorca poem , “ La aurora . " La Magdalena anointed Christ’s feet with it , fíjate . Suddenly , todos los tecolotes me estaban mirando . Huge , hammered tin , mirror owls . Teensy , chillón , carved and painted , copal-wood alebrije owls . Super rascuache ceramic buhos for the gringo tourists . Todos me clavaban con una cierta mirada , y era tu mirada . Mom , how is it that only today — al mediodía en México , a las 10 de la mañana Califas-time — caigo ? I remark on the absolute symmetry , la coincidencia between you and your favorite bird . But wasit even your favorite bird really , el tecolote ? You loved all birds . Oye Mom , maybe you put one over on all of us — inescrutable , reticente , mysterious and unknowable . Representante sine qua non del conocimiento ( even from when you were a little girl , and walked all the way to school under the blistering Visalia sun para ahorrar tu dime for the bus so you could save up for books and pens ) , like the owl itself . Capaz you just let everybody keep buying you esos owly trinkets , big , small and in-between , recuerdos de todos nuestrosviajes when you couldn’t travel any further , anymore , than to Jacques Pepin’s or Julia Child’s cocina , Katherine Hepburn’s Africa . ¡Mamá ! Tú que habías sido tan viajera , always . Y tan elegante anfitriona . Tus estantes , rebosantes de owls , would greet your guests and visitors ( cada vez menos , hay que reconocerlo , y quizás tú así lo preferías ; I’ll never know ) even when you , recluída en el cozy den que vino a constituir todo tu mundo , ya no podías saludarles con un beso at the top of the stairs , “ May I take your wrap ? " Con tu casquito de pelo azabache , your Aztec cheekbones and milky High-spanic complexion , your burgundy brocade caftan , enveloped en una nube de “ L’Air du Temps , " bandeja de sizzling homemade cheesepuffs extended . Brindabas todo para el máximo confort de tus guests , pero cual volcán dormido , like a TRUE Scorpio , you always held your most private self bien close to the vest . I’ve seen algunos chinks en esa armadura , like the time when . . . ay , don’t worry , Mom . No voy a hablar de eso , I promise . Al volver del mercado , “ Descansó su mamá a las 10 " read the message on a little scrap of paper que me dieron en la Recepción del Hotel Las Golondrinas . Así supe . Pero porque te presentí tan fuerte en los owl- and nardosigns — tu presencia ghostly yet oddly comforting — like the long shadow cast just after dusk , by a barn owl in flight over the abandoned farm buildings en el campus de UCSC , where you lived so happily , tan en tu elemento for years — puedo entender , puedo hasta aceptar que yo esté aquí en México , I am here in your Mexico once again , y tú tan del otro lado , ahora para siempre . So descansa ahora , Mom . Y ahí te wacho on the other side . VIII Route 66 Crónica 19 septiembre 2001 Los Angeles For Paul Saint-Amour Stunned into silence . ¿Qué se puede escribir ahora , in the wake of the blast del 11 de septiembre , esa fecha already etched into my conciencia as the aniversario of Pinochet’s golpe contra Allende and democracy en Chile ? Y . . . ( pausa porteña ) no . Al contrario : hayque escribir . Besides , I am beginning to discover , desde que estoy de regreso , here , in my ( ? ) Califaztlán : I can write anywhere . Adiós fetiches , que only with that perfect pale blue , fuchsia-ink , bevelled felt-tip pen , in a black and red , lined , Chinese cuaderno bought at Little Ricky’s on the Lower East Side , que sólo on the 30 Stockton bus , careening por el centro de San Francisco toward Union Square and the BART station , or — a more recent superstition — que sólo con mi vista del Jardín Botánico en Buenos Aires will the words come . So here I am , gente , dizque back home , just north of Route 66 — la Foothill Blvd. — right on the easternmost edge del condado de Los Angeles , right smack on the edge , también , del Evil — que digamos , del InlandEmpire . Yeah , back home in the detritus de las refacciones that have been going on forever , it seems , to my fire-sign impaciencia ( pero en realidad it’s been apenitas 4 semanas ) . Amidst the cement dust from the “ pampa " pattern ceramic floor tiles manufactured , te lo juro , en la Fábrica San Lorenzo , just outside Buenos Aires pero purchased at “ House 2 Home , " right here en el Evil Empire ! Amidst the stacks of boxes , con la charla y la boombox de los albañiles peruanos , Elena , Manuel and Marga , con el overpowering smell de oilbased pintura , y de latex , with molduras , toilet parts , bisagras , paper , plastic sheeting , rollers scattered everywhere y mis libros y papeles still nowhere in sight . Good thing I don’t watch TV . Pero you know how impressionable I am ! Even just hearing en la radio about those people que saltaban , flames at their back , al vacío from the 50th story de las Twin Torres and it’s seared into my mind’s eye/I por siempre jamás . Just like the time I read , a los 9 años , ese story about the grizzly bear attack en Yellowstone en un old Life magazine — sin fotos siquiera — how could they possibly put fotos de una horrific , enraged , si tan sólo maternalmente motivated mama grizzly que , para proteger a sus cubs , chased a esa pobre pendeja gente up the trees , her hot , jadeante breath on their legs and then , las atroces garras y fauces grabbing and clawing , ripped them back down and maimed them . Forever . A fate worse than death : to be alive and to have to remember . I never wanted that picture in my mind , pero even a los 9 años the words alone were enough and there it was , forever : una huge mama grizzly , yanking those three people right out of a tree — one of them screamed no , no , no as he fell , eso es lo que ponía la Lifemagazine . She pulled them down with her fangs and claws , right by their butt . Y anyway , allí está esa image , in there , in me , por siempre jamás . Pero anyway , even now Paul , no obstante los constant news updates , los numb students , los too-talky or struck dumb colegas and college administrators planning “ healing " activities , los freaked out international Emails — tu 11 de septiembre Virgo cumpleaños forever linked , marked , marred by asssociation — my thirst surges . Prevalece , incluso . El deseo de la palabra , wrote Pizarnik . El ansia de escribir . I must . Ek moet skryf . Y quizás now more than ever , como están diciendo algunos conocidos writers “ de color , " like Rubén Martínez , like la campanita ganchos ( bell hooks ) and Anna Deveare Smith . We mustwrite now . Right now . O sea que no es sólo en Buenos Aires donde esta mi represa se desborda . ( Love that word for overflow . Desbordar . Loses its borders . ) Where words , a la sombra de las palmeras milenarias del Jardín Botánico , come to life . Es también aquí , en lo que llamo el Evil Empire . En este mi Inland Empire , this place you , Santo-Amor ( hottest newly-minted English prof en el país the year you came “ on the market , " se dice , pero optahte por Pomona College . . . dios te salve ) , have called a bleached out , desolate apocalypse de abandono y imminent doom just itching to happen . I’m not sure why , pero usually , playing advocate to your demonio , yo te intento aplacar . Hasta defiendo al Evil ( I can’t believe myself ) en su grittiness , en su very unhip inlandness(INTERIORidad ) , comparado a la anonadante atrocidad beige and overpopulated , todo uniforme que es , por ejemplo , Orange County . Te recuerdo , Paul , como at least we can hear coyotes at night , see stretches of dirt , digo , undeveloped land , however tumbleweed-filled , however cracked and parched , in its too-close proximity al desierto y no a la costa . Faraway de esa otra “ real " California que everybody knows de los movies . Tedigo well , Paul , Thomas Pynchon and all those other groovy ( pre ? ) PoMo big white boy novelistas , como John Barth and Walker Percy and John Hawkes and Nathanael West before them predicted it , scripted its — and our — demise decades ago ¿y no ves ? We’re still here . Hangueando . Esta mañana , I rounded the curve del suburban cul-de-sac en el que estoy viviendo again , incongruentemente , after República Arabe Siria 2847 , 3-B and its diesel-scented afternoons , its view of the Disco supermarket , the famous Jardín Botánico cats , the squealing colectivo brakes , todos estos citysounds que se fundieron , eventualmente , into a lulling or energizing white noise . I rounded that curve in my new , boring Honda Accord sedan ( del que tengo que derivar el único excitement de su V engine y de su slightly racy yet still elegantly safe color : “ Emerald green pearl " ) and I almost ran smack into a big old towtruck . Totalmente blocking my path . Y allí estaba el rubio , mega-tanned , fornido de mi neighbor , el que se ve absolutely , definitely , like a “ Soldier of Fortune " magazine poster boy . Creo que es un ex-cop . Y estaba frantically directing the operation of loading , onto dicho remolquero , his prize , his baby ( su único baby porque creo que su hijo ya no vive con él y una novia que entraba y salía de su condo hace unos años , está long gone ) : his cerulean blue , matte finish , chrome-shiny , vintage Chevy Vega . Yes . A real Vega . Uno de los peores coches ever made in history ! Pero el vato se desvive por él . Todos los weekends he is under it , lying next to it , fiddling about con un juego de elaborate specialty tools . Lavándolo . Tweaking and tinkering and waxing . Acariciándolo . And now , me hace una señal medio helpless , medio pleading . El towtruck driver slips himself into overdrive y comienza a moverse como in fast motion . Le doy un little wave patrás al vecino . Semi-irritada , semi-resignada . Well , en ese splitsecond donde decido no dejar el auto en idle sino turn it off , I flash que estoy en un momento , en una other dimensión quintaesencialmente californiano : the car ante todo ! En Buenos Aires este delay habría ocasionado , sha , a zillion honking horns , palabrotas , shrieks , insultos . Pero qué te pasa , boludo de mieeerda , movete , boludo ! Pero we’re not in Buenos Aires . Y aquí , cualquier protesta like mamá used to do on the Los Angeles freeways when I was a little girl — " honey , roll down the window and give that guy the finger , will you ? Ese jerk just cut me off ! " — provocafácilmente , desencadena an armed response . Yes . El famoso road rage . So I sit , consciente de que este bright blue Vega is this excop’s vida , carajo . I’m gonna be late for work ! So I begin quickly revising , remapping my day in my mind : ir al gimnasio during the lunch hour en vez de antes de mi clase . . . Oh , sharp , sudden longing pa ’ cuando mi “ exercise " eran esas endless , long-limbed caminatas en Buenos Aires : de 15 cuadras por Las Heras , past Parque Las Heras — the doggiest park in the mundo — up to Librería Norte para recoger un huge fix de poetry books de Sandro , o de 35 blocks sin siquiera darme cuenta , por Villa Crespo . Yes , all the way back home , up Malabia from Parque Centenario in Caballito to Palermo , past the Armenian temple , past the cheapo leather factories that give way , gradually , to los trendy restaurantes y boutiques de Palermo Viejo , ah , the scent wafting , from las tiny mom ‘ n ’ pop purveyors , de empanadas — carne dulce , carne picante , queso y albahaca , apio , cebosha y nuez — ah , the linden trees right below my balcony después de una sudestada . . . . I’ve got time . Estoy viva . Mi hermana Laura está en Venice ; ya no vive in the East Village . Y María Negroni y los suyos están a salvo in Brooklyn , shell-shocked and acrid smoke penetrating even their dreams , just one week after , pero a salvo . Y mis tíos Larry and Zippie Levine están en Long Island . Y mi prima Lee Weiss , hace una década vive en Portland . I am here , de vuelta en Califas . Arrasaron las Twin Towers , and I am writing . Paul , no almorzamos en tu birthday this year , pero I am writing this for you . Ya no estoy en Buenos Aires , pero I am writing . IX Estragos Acuáticos Crónica 27 enero 2001 Buenos Aires Para Lucía Guerra-Cunningham Estoy sentada en el comedor de nuestro departamento , taipeando en el laptop de Pierre which somehow , de milagro , did NOT get ruined by the sheets of water que inundaron nuestro departamento while we were in Chile . Si hay un Dios , his/her name is écriture , porque although we returned to the disconcerting fact of una cañería reventada in the departamento above ours , y muchísimo water damage in our apartment , the computer , my work and most of my books were spared ( my first editions of Pizarnik , unscathed ! ) . Several rather boring garments were ruined by mold ; y hay un olor fuerte a moho en casi todo el departamento . Un plomero supposedly tenía que venir to begin to fix things , including one of our toilets que está a punto de reventar , pero . . . we’re 